.. _get-started:

###########
Get Started
###########

********
Concepts
********

The SCIPR algorithm for aligning scRNA-seq data is an iterative algorithm with
the goal of learning a global function which can be used to align cells of one
type of batch to another type of batch. It proceeds in steps, each of which
consists of two phases:

1. **Matching** - pairing cells between two batches of data (i.e. cells which
   have the same "state").

2. **Transforming** - learning a function to move the cells of one batch closer
   to their assigned counterpart (the cell they are paired with from step (1))
   in the other batch.

Phase 1 corresponds to panel 2) in the figure below, and phase 2 corresponds
to panel 3):

.. image:: /_static/scipr-summary.png
        :alt: scipr method overview

**Finally**, after all of the steps of SCIPR, the resulting transformation
function is actually the composition of the learned functions at each step
(panel 6) in the figure above).

**************
Implementation
**************

The SCIPR algorithm to learn the transformation function is implemented as the
:meth:`scipr.SCIPR.fit` method. Users can secify which algorithms to use for
the matching and the transforming, either from among the options we provide in
our :ref:`api`, or by implementing their own custom :ref:`extensions <extend>`.

In particular, scipr implements the *Strategy* design pattern [GHJV94]_, where
each matching or transformation algorithm is implemented as a concrete subclass
of either the abstract :class:`scipr.matching.Match` or
:class:`scipr.transform.Transformer` classes.


********
Examples
********

Use the classic Iterative Closest Points (ICP) [BeMc92]_ algorithm to align cells::

    import scipr
    from scipr.matching import Closest
    from scipr.transform import Rigid

    closest = Closest()
    rigid = Rigid()

    model = scipr.SCIPR(match_algo=closest,
                        transform_algo=rigid,
                        input_normalization='l2')
    model.fit(batch_A, batch_B)

    # Apply the model to get the aligned result
    batch_A_aligned = model.trasform(batch_A)

Alternatively, we recommend trying matching and transformation functions more
suited to scRNA-seq data::

    from scipr.matching import MNN
    from scipr.transform import Affine

    mnn = MNN()
    affine = Affine()

    model = scipr.SCIPR(match_algo=mnn,
                        transform_algo=affine,
                        input_normalization='l2')
    model.fit(batch_A, batch_B)
    batch_A_aligned = model.trasform(batch_A)

*******
Logging
*******

scipr uses Python's built-in logging module to report informational messages
and training metrics (e.g. loss values at each gradient descent iteration), and
so normally you should see nothing printed to `stdout` (unless it's warning
message). If you would like to see this informational text, configure the
Python logger with the appropriate level like so::

   import logging
   logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

===========
TensorBoard
===========

Some scipr functions can be enabled with
`TensorBoard <https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard/>`_ logging, giving you a
useful "dashboard" view of model metrics as the SCIPR model is fit, as in the
example screenshot below. It can be very useful for debugging an alignment. See
:ref:`install` for enabling this feature.

.. image:: /_static/tensorboard-example.png
        :alt: TensorBoard logging dashboard example

.. rubric:: References

.. [GHJV94] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., & Vlissides, J. (1994).
   Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.

.. [BeMc92] Besl, P. J., & McKay, H. D. (1992). A method for registration
   of 3-D shapes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
   Intelligence, 14(2), 239â€“256.

